Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen and welcome to the final iteration of Cheer Up You'll Soon Be Dead
which is a look at Landry Woodwell's During World War I. It's going to take the form of two halves.
I'm going to be talking in two halves really. Now, again, times are hard. You've paid your four quid.
I want to give you your money's worth. You know, just pay four pounds to come and see me. It's quite a bit of money.
So I'm going to be talking probably for about fifty minutes an hour about the first up today which has landed itself in the war
with particular reference to the Royal Army Medical Corps who were billeted here.
We're then going to have a break and we'll stop and the glenos can sell you some coffee.
Just watch them, they might be quid out of you as well. It's quite stuffy in here. We'll try and get some air flowing through here.
I haven't spent my entire working career in learning and development without knowing when my class is starting to lose the will to live.
So as soon as I see people having very, very long blinks, we'll go for a break. Then we'll come back.
So try and stay with me. I'm then going to talk about the local Yeomanry regiment, the Montgomery Yeomanry.
These were Landry Woodwell's own, if you like, pals formation during World War I.
We'll talk about those as well. I'm going to show you a bit of film. It's going to be quite nice so I can rest my voice.
Afterwards, a lot of the time people have stayed during the week for questions and chats and to show me things, which is a bit of memorabilia and things which is quite nice as well.
So that's how the plan is anyway. It's a basis for change.
The RAMC in Landrynda. Now, there is very little footprint almost 100 years later to indicate that during the First World War, Landrynda was basically one enormous training regiment for the Royal Army Medical Corps.
There are some signs. There is one gravestone down in the municipal cemetery. Private Grey, RAMC, who died of influenza in the spa, last started training in 1915.
There is another RAMC soldier there as well. He does not have the military gravestone. Private Grey has both types. He has a civilian and a Commonwealth gravestone to actually indicate his service.
We need to establish what the spa was like at the start of the war. Now, arguably, its heyday was gone in terms of actually selling the mineral water. Hi, do come in.
My partner will sell you a ticket. Thank you very much indeed.
The spa had had very bad years leading up to the First World War. 1912, for example, was particularly bad because it was a very, very long, wet summer. In fact, more or less like what we've had this week really.
The season was a disaster. There had been another bad season in 1902 on the death of Queen Victoria in the accession of King Edward VIII. While they were waiting to crown him, King Edward VIII, sorry, VII even, caught appendicitis, which in those days was a pretty serious condition.
In fact, it's a pretty serious condition today. He actually hovered between life and death for several weeks. While he was doing that, he was actually considered quite unseemly to go off on holiday and be enjoying yourself. So people didn't.
So the spa actually suffered quite badly then as well.
The summer of 1914 was quite long and hot and one could have reasonably expected a decent season. However, people weren't really coming and the First World War kind of put the kibosh on that as well.
As the storm crowds are gathering over Europe, people of Landrind is obviously very patriotic, start preparing for war. Obviously, there had been no major war on the European continent for almost 100 years, so people didn't really know what to do. Wars were things that happened overseas.
One of the things of course that would have had a bearing on this was the fact that the Landrind spa system would have been very much built in imitation of the German spa system.
Therefore, at the time of the outbreak of the First World War, there were actually several Germans working in town. The census records for 1911 show about 30 to 40 of them working in various hotels as masseurs, waiters, barbers, members of the band.
And of course, on the outbreak of war, they find themselves a bit stuck. Those who sort of twigged that something was going to happen left early because of course a lot of them would have reserved liability for the German army, so they went back to join up.
Also, as the First World War breaks out, down on the Dufferin Field, a religious convention is starting. Later on, it became known as Caisic in Wales. It's quite a large religious convention. There are a large number of German pastors, cantors and German aristocrats in town for that as well.
Now, initially, the treatment of the enemy aliens is quite light-touching. In fact, as war is breaking out, prayers are said in the Friends Meeting House in Landrinded in Welsh, English and German. That's so well actually these people are thought of in Landrinded as well.
In fact, if you look around Landrinded, you can still see evidence of the German influence on the town, people with house names like Carlsbad. So it was definitely there.
Now, first they were told, right, OK, you can't go more than five miles out of the town. You have to be in where we can see by seven o'clock at night. They were curfewed.
Anti-German sentiment actually grew to quite extreme levels. It was stoked up by people who really should have known better. For example, Lady Glanusk, who wrote very snotty letters to the paper saying, why have we got all these Germans roaming around?
Scoop them up now. Because of course, there was all this paranoia about people on the east coast of England flashing lamps out to signal U-boats and all these rumors about Russian soldiers passing through train stations stamping the snow off their boots.
Recently arrived in the middle of June or whatever it was, straight from Russia. Landrind was by no means exempt for this. The hotels started refusing to accept paper money.
The workers of the urban district council digging some trenches in the road was a sign obviously that the Germans were at cross gates and we were making our defenses.
Quite silly really. A department store in Brecon called Heinz, H-E-I-N-S, was forced to take out full page adverts in the paper saying, all our staff are British, all our stock is British, we have a British concern, please stop smashing our windows.
Eventually, the Germans were scooped up. Those of you of certain mature years will remember Miss Abelie, who until her retirement was a teacher at the local primary school had grown up, in fact taught my father.
She recounts this story. Her best friend was a little German girl who was the daughter of the bandmaster in the town. One day she went to school and her friend was sat next to her, the next day they were all gone.
They were all scooped up, they were taken up to Connors Quay in North Wales and eventually sent to internment camps. In fact there was a very large German internment camp on the Isle of Man for obvious reasons.
Landrinded as a spa had always tried to point itself towards the high end of the market. It tried to be just a little bit more hoity-toity than other spas.
They suffered because of this, because on August Bank holiday 1914, when there was absolutely nobody in Landrinded, there were something like 2000 people in Lanoutid getting off the train to sample the waters and walk around the park.
Now there are other reasons for this as well. Lanoutid is a lot easier to get to on the train. In fact a lot of the clientele for these spas, mainly Lanoutid, came from South Wales. Miners.
Lanoutid was just that little bit more affordable, the flesh pots of Landrinded, so that's where they went. In fact a lot of the time Landrinded really cut its own throat with its attitude of publishing the names of people in the local papers, the hotels having caught sort of rivalry and different tariffs to see who could actually get the best quality of people.
The result of that was that in the years leading up to the war, when the military approached Landrinded from permission to stage manoeuvres in the area, they were very firmly flat-batted away. We don't want anybody interfering with the season.
Now this in Landrinded is not a year-round thing. This goes on from May to about September. The rest of the year Landrinded goes dead ship. And all the people that built places like this, shareholders, people invested in these things as they would in companies, exactly the same as they've done in the railways, they wanted to return all their money.
And the danger of course of Landrinded is almost entirely a mono-economy. It's almost entirely predicated on tourism and mineral trade. There is almost absolutely nothing else here.
Now, the First World War starts, the season is in tatters. The 1914 season in Landrinded makes a profit of £19 for the town. Disaster.
So as we make our way then through the early autumn months of 1914, in terms of cold hard economics, the town is approached as to the possibility of establishing a training regiment here for the Royal Army Medical Corps.
Now the request for this comes out of Western Command in Cardiff.
The people of Landrinded have their opinion somewhat swayed by the realisation that for every soldier billeted there will be an accommodation allowance of just over 21 shillings a week. In fact, 3 shillings, 5 pence, 8 new day.
And I'll show you what they expected to get for their money later on.
Now, the Urban District Council realising this was going to be a money spinner, started encouraging the locals to offer up bed space.
Now the requirement was for 4,000 beds. Now we're talking about Landrinded here. You can imagine Landrinded without Pentrospha, without the project, without Trevollen, without all the housing around Lant Avenue.
We're talking about the hard centre of Landrinded here. And it's a sort of testament to the towns of Bertie as a tourist centre that it was a mono-economy, that it could actually take and absorb this number of people.
A lot of people arrived and ended up in private houses as well. And they were, in some cases, two and three to a room.
The only proviso that the military made is that they had to have a bed each. Which for a lot of them actually, it probably may have been the first time that it actually happened in their lives.
And as we'll see, probably a lot of them would have been in the first pair of decent boots they'd had and it would have been the best food they would have ever had as well.
So the various wards of Landrinded started going into competition and the council started going out and saying, well come on, North Ward, we need to encourage more South Ward, they've got nearly 1500 beds down there.
Come on, come on, come on. By about the end of 1914 they managed to jumble up 4000 persons worth of bed space and they were able to notify Western Command, yes we can do this.
Now, while this is happening of course, there are other Welsh towns involved in the tourist trade who are on their uppers as well. Places like Colwyn Bay.
Colwyn Bay come in and say, right, well if Landod's going to do it for 21 Bob, we'll do it for 17 Bob. And they start undercutting.
And it actually does take political intervention at quite a high level to get this regiment move to Landrinded.
Now I think probably we're talking the intervention of Lloyd George here. He was quite fond of Landrinded because he used to come here with his mistresses allegedly of whom he had numerous.
He was always quite a soft spot in his heart for Landrinded with Lloyd George.
So as it ends up, the first train of soldiers arrives in early 1950. A thousand of them in a one-er off a special train to the station.
They marched out of the station, formed into squads in the station yard there and marched off to their various accommodation in the various wards of Landrinded.
Further trains follow and the fact that 4,000 troops arrive here in about a week. So almost instantly this place is one enormous garrison town.
Landrinded as well, early on in the war, the Joint Committee of the Red Cross and the St John Ambulance Brigade are notified that they are going to have to provide a hospital capacity of 80 beds for treatment.
One of the first people that arrive are Belgian refugees. This is a picture taken outside the old county club hospital, sorry, hotel, which is now the library.
These chaps around the back here, those are Belgian soldiers. These are the local VADs, semi-professional nursing.
The head of those was Miss Tune who was the manager at the time of the Kingsland Hotel in the Ridgeport.
These guys were basically brought over, patched up and sent back to fight.
They were quite well received in the spa because they tried to pay their way, they gave French lessons, they tried to mix in.
Some of the Belgians that actually stayed in the country later on were not particularly well received because they took jobs.
The unemployment problem then was quite large as it is now and they were seen really very much as the incoming workers of their day.
So they were by no means universally well received.
Here we've got a picture, and yes forgive me, it's a very poor picture, it's a photograph of a 100 year old picture taken out of a newspaper.
This is taken up by Landry Wooded Lake. That's Mr. Margaret of Joes, there's a lake side cottage there.
The big oak tree on the corner is over here where you stand for the fireworks.
Up on this podium here is General McKinnon who is the GOC, General Officer Commanding of Western District.
At the front here we've got Major D'Lap who was the CO of the training regiment.
And they're marching the troops past.
Now, they're in files of three and there's 4,000 of them.
So it actually takes 20 minutes to march this column past that podium.
A large number of people. They wouldn't let them up on the common in case they churned it up.
Churned the commons these days, doesn't it?
Protect the common, protect the season, protect our wonderful resources.
Now, these chaps who joined the RMC.
A lot of them joined because they did not want to join the teeth arms of the army.
The reason being is they did not want to actively kill people.
They were in some cases men of conscience.
There were great representations in these troops of Mormons.
A lot of people have been in the Salvation Army.
A lot of Quakers, some Quakers.
There were quite a few Scotsmen in there.
And it's believed there were actually one or two Americans pre 1917 and the Americans joining the war.
They'd obviously gone over the border, had a Canada, come over, pretended to be Commonwealth forces and enlisted like that.
Some quite eminent people had given up jobs in their civilian life.
And we're talking here professors of theology, notable churchmen.
People from the greatest walks of life abandoned all that for the duration of the war to serve as a stretch of bow in the RMC.
Then on the conclusion of the war they went back to their previous job as the chair of theology at the University of Oxford where they were.
But some of these guys, private soldiers, had strings of letters after their name that had to be seen to be believed.
Now, considering this place became a garrison town, they actually were quite well behaved.
I mean there was, if you look at the punishment returns, there were little court marshals held down in the county buildings.
And some of the reports of their shenanigans made it into the local papers.
But we're talking small cases of theft, AWOL and just the sort of general niff-nuff and trivia you get in a regiment.
And I spent half my time standing in front of people being prisoners framed for.
There wasn't a lot of the kind of muggery, buggery and thuggery you would get in a garrison town.
They were very, very, very well behaved.
In fact, large numbers of them were part of the temperance movement. They were T total.
So this is probably one of the only times you could say in the history of Llandrindad that the churches would have been full and the pubs would have been empty.
In fact, one Sunday it would be by no means unbelievable to see 700 soldiers in a church parade at the Holy Trinity.
And the other denominational churches in the town would show similar patterns.
For example, the Pales over at Llandegley.
And yet again, these guys who have been eminent churchmen in civilian life as private soldiers preach from the pulpits of the town because that's what they did.
Because the pubs were not being visited, they actually had to send and set up coffee buffets in Milton Street.
Lending libraries, a billiard hall.
And this is what they did. The junior ranks had a curfew of seven o'clock.
It was by no means unusual to see junior soldiers walking around the town with a young lady on their arm.
At seven o'clock they had to be in.
So they used to complain that at seven o'clock you could unshackle the young lady from a private soldier and shuckle them onto a sergeant who were allowed to stay out later.
Initially, some of the private soldiers were actually boarded in the same boarding accommodation as some of the young ladies who were boarding at the local school.
And there were actually concerns for the chastity of these young ladies, but that was soon resolved when they were all moved in separate accommodation.
But yet again, there was crime, but it's very, very, very low level.
I think there's one theft of a whip. I think it was in Bilth.
A couple of guys had gone into a pub and had a couple of pints of beer. Same old, same old.
And a whip went missing.
Of course, during the First World War it was actually illegal to serve a soldier in uniform alcohol.
And of course there were prosecutions of the local publicans for doing precisely that.
Now, this is a recent acquisition of mine and I'm very pleased with this.
It came to me by nefarious means.
This actually shows a group of RAMC soldiers in group formation outside the Commodore Hotel.
I can tell by the RAMC from the cap badges and obviously the orderly patches on their arms.
I can also tell with a great deal of confidence that this picture was taken very, very early on during the war.
And I can tell this because of the uniforms.
These guys over here are wearing a standard khaki. They've been obviously in for a while.
These guys are in what are known as Kitchener's Blues.
Basically, at the start of the war, everybody needs to get into uniform very, very, very quickly.
There aren't enough uniforms so people just start dressing up in anything they could find.
Which would have been Boer War uniforms, regimental best uniforms.
You end up with these kind of ruritanian parades of people wearing just about anything.
The problem they had was that in order to have a khaki uniform you need to have a dyed khaki uniform.
Now, at the start of the First World War, who were the biggest chemical manufacturers of the dyes in Europe?
The Germans. BASF. Bayerische Analyse und Sodafabrik.
I mean ICI is German, in fact about German.
So the first few months that actually British soldiers went into battle,
they were actually wearing uniforms dyed with German dye.
You can see these guys here are wearing just about anything.
So probably then, late 14, early 15, just as the training regiments are starting to form up in Andorra.
Right, so what did you get for your 21 boll?
This is the ration scale, the daily ration scale for a private soldier staying with a boarding house in Landrunden.
Have a look at that and tell me what you think.
It's quite meaty isn't it?
One pound uncooked weight of meat for your lunch, that's four quarter pound burgers.
I have an occasion to probably sat down and eat a pound of bacon in one sitting, but that's another story.
Yeah, very bready as well. The bread was potentially atrocious.
Now, there was no large scale rationing in this country during World War I.
Towards the end of 1918, marjorie went on the ration, I think bacon went on the ration, and sugar went on the ration.
Now that obviously was quite important for the people of Radnorshire,
because when sugar went on the ration, it meant they couldn't make jam, which was an important food staple in these parts.
With 4,000 soldiers times a pound of meat for lunch, it's 4,000 pounds of meat a day for lunch alone.
The upshot of this is that just about every swede and potato in Radnorshire made its way towards Landrunden and made its way across the tables of the boarding houses.
Now in reality, there was a bit of a reality check point with this, and the soldiers were able to sort of locally negotiate what they had.
They said, well, we won't worry about a pound of meat for lunch, but can we have a bit of this and a bit of that?
There was a certain amount of compromise.
Bread, of course, in the First World War was largely adulterated with things like potato flour and any other sort of bulk carbohydrate they could find.
It was a whole grey colour. It was also an offence to sell fresh bread.
There was a prosecution in Landrunden for somebody who'd sold fresh bread.
It was a baker's down on Park Terrace.
The idea was that you left the bread for a day so it could go a bit stale, you could slice it a bit thinner and people wouldn't eat it quite so much of it.
That was the plan anyway, but it can't have been very nice at all.
Now, notable amongst the people that passed through Landrunden in the RAMC training regiment is this guy, Noel Godfrey Chavasse, MCVC star.
If you see a star against any form of decoration, it means that the holder has won it more than once.
So Chavasse won the Victoria Cross twice.
In fact, in the Breckland-Radner in 1916 he is mentioned in one of the notes as being congratulated as an ex-trainee from Landrunden.
At that point I think he just won his military cross.
Chavasse won the Victoria Cross twice.
His military cross.
Chavasse was one of these people you meet in life who were annoyingly good at everything.
He was one of twins. They were the sons of somebody who later went on to be the Bishop of Liverpool.
Goes to Oxford, gets a first in philosophy plus a double blue in athletics and lacrosse.
He and his brother compete in the 400 metres at the 1908 Olympic Games.
They only get as far as the heats, they don't make the finals, but they're doing pretty well anyway.
Chavasse stays on at Oxford after his first in philosophy to study medicine.
Joins the officer training corps, becomes a sergeant, works his way through medical school, goes back to Liverpool where he's apprenticed to the notable orthopaedic surgeon Robert Hunt.
He ends up at the outbreak of war then as the regimental doctor to the 13th battalion, the King's Regiment, also known as the Liverpool Scottish.
Now what I'm going to do is I'm going to read verbatim then from his citations.
I don't want to miss any of this, what he actually ended up with with his Victoria Crosses.
As a surgeon lieutenant Chavasse was gazetted for a military cross in January 1916 for Gantri Hoogh Belgium the previous June.
He was to gain a Victoria Cross for his actions on the 9th August 1916 at Guillemot, France.
During an attack Chavasse tended wounded all the day whilst under fire.
That night he searched for wounded in no man's land in sight of the enemy trenches.
These feats were repeated for a second day when he carried an injured man 500 yards to safety, rescued three men from a crater on the enemy trench line.
Remaining in harm's way longer than necessary to bury dead and collect identity tags.
In addition to his normal medical caseload he'd saved the lives of around 20 men.
During another action in Belgium in July 1917 Chavasse was severely injured in the head whilst carrying a wounded soldier to a dressing station.
Refusing to abandon his position and faint from hunger and his wounds he continued to treat the wounded and assist with the retrieval of several more wounded men.
Over difficult brand.
On August 2nd he was rested in his first aid post when he was hit by a shell.
Chavasse with at least six more injuries crawled half a mile to get help.
His wounds however this time proved fatal and he died on August 4th and was buried nearby at Brandhoek Military Ceremony.
Now Chavasse has probably got throughout this country more roads named after him and more statues just about any other person from the First World War.
Particularly around Liverpool for obvious reasons.
There are however no memorials or any indication this guy ever passed through at Landrind at all.
Maybe we should have one of those blue plaques or something they have on people's houses or something.
Next time we have a new road which is what we call it Chavasse VC Road or Terrace or something like that.
It's certainly a thought.
You may have heard of somebody called Lord Ashcroft.
He's this amazing Tory party donor who lives in Belize and has billions of pounds.
His hobby is collecting Tory crosses.
He has got about 11% of all the VC's ever awarded because he's got pots of money.
A couple of years back now Chavasse's old college at Oxford St Peter's they fell on hard times.
They actually auctioned off Chavasse's medical collection for which Lord Ashcroft paid 1.5 million pounds.
We're not sure we're going to quit it.
Yet again no indication at all this chap actually ever passed through the portals of Landrind.
He was certainly trained here.
One of my projects for this year I'm going to delve a bit further into.
I do remember I can get quite a bit of time in the Museum of Army Medical Services up at Keir Barracks in Surrey which is the home of the RAMC.
They actually have got just about nothing about Landrind at all because I asked them.
Yes it is but as we'll see with a lot of this stuff the hospitals that were set up here on the completion of the war all the records were destroyed.
A lot of it went up in the Blitz as well unfortunately in World War II.
It was actually very difficult to find out.
Now...
After about four or five months in Landrind the RAMC are taken out to Pennymont Common and they go into tents.
At that point the people of Landrind are very very very sad to see them go.
They'd be very nice chaps also in terms of raw economics.
In terms of the actual accommodation costs as well they had put about £100,000 into the local economy.
That was in accommodation fees alone.
That's not counting them getting their wages and going into town and spending it.
That was at a time when the Urban District Council was overdrawn.
So arguably the coming of the RAMC financially for Landrind was its utter salvation.
To give you an idea of scale here, £100,000 is a lot of money now.
But then the salary for a nurse was about £40 a year.
If you went down to Tom Norton's he would sell you a Model T Ford for just under £200.
As one person put it they were in everything and part of everything.
We then see a shift from the use of Landrind as a training regiment for the RAMC
to Landrind had been used to actually treat wounded soldiers.
The guys that went out from the training regiments they went to be part of Sir Henry Rawlinson's 4th Army.
It was the 4th Army that went over the top July 1916 the first day of the Somme and the weeks that followed that.
One of the major conditions wounded soldiers suffered from was something called myalgia.
These days we would call myalgia muscle ache.
I offer you the chance if you want to take something away from this to go and do yourself a little experiment.
You see the weather we've had this week. I'd like you to go into your garden,
dig yourself a nice big trench then live in it for the next fortnight and see how you get on.
These guys as they found themselves when they were in Flanders or indeed all over the world
standing up to their forks in cold water started exhibiting some quite serious symptoms.
The symptoms were very akin to rheumatism.
Now let's not confuse this between what we're going to show you shortly and trench foot.
Trench foot is something different. If you stand in water your feet will rot. That is trench foot.
Myalgia gradually became known as trench fever.
Now something like 40 to 45% of all the people who were injured on all competent sides in the First World War
suffered from trench fever.
Now a lot of the time when these guys were appearing at their sick parade
with what at the time was known as neurasthenia, commonly now known as shell shock and PTSD,
I mean every army has malingerers, every army has sick bay rangers.
So separating them out from genuinely injured people was quite problematic.
Initially the doctors in a lot of cases were not sympathetic and the surgeons had quite a time doing this.
But it became apparent that this actual condition was very real.
Now at the time rheumatism was thought to be caused by a lack of iron.
Therefore what better treatment for rheumatism conditions than the course of calybiate water from Landrinden
which was actually chock full of iron.
And my great grandfather who owned the moors at the time was a great exponent of the use of calybiate for rheumatism.
He swore by it.
That's a rubbish.
But even so he swore by it.
It became apparent due to further research that trench fever was not caused by immersion in water.
The guys who were doing the fighting were as lousy as rooks.
And what used to happen was that the lice would bite you, they'd also go to the toilet on your skin,
and the lads irritated would scratch and they would scratch lice feces into wounds.
Trench fever is actually caused by a bacterial infection.
If you went to the doctor with something similar these days, in fact cat scratch fever as they call it is very similar,
he would give you a course of erythromycin and you'd be right as rain in a fortnight.
Now in a lot of cases these guys did get better.
And it's debatable whether the actual treatment or whether the fact they were in a nice clean bed and receiving decent food and having some rest
was the actual major factor in them actually improving.
They were also starting to use the actual waters of the moors in addition to the kind of hydrotherapy applications,
there's actually drinking the stuff, they actually started using things like the hot baths, massage,
these newfangled things like Nauheim treatments or electric heat on the skin.
The foundations of what we would now call physiotherapy.
And the guys did improve and were sent back to the front, or in some cases were downgraded into non-teeth arms.
The upshot this is, is that by about mid 17, 18 the spa is doing about 600 treatments a week for wounded soldiers.
And by the end of the war the spa has done something like 100,000 treatments.
In fact for the 1918 season the spa makes a notional profit of just under £1,700.
Which is about the last time the spa ever makes a profit.
Before it starts it's totally terminal decline and is being subsidised by the rate payers into the 1950s to the point that they can't stand it anymore.
So they did make a severe contribution to the actual treatment of wounded soldiers in the Landryden.
It was only the moors, not only the moors that did this, the satellite hospitals around town,
the Barclay was used to accommodate soldiers, Granville, Pennoy on Park Crescent, the Montpellier or the Moston where it used to be was also used.
The depot for the stores was at Fron Hylig.
So really these kind of little satellite mini hospitals were used.
The Rock Park when actually there was a hotel down there, that had 400 beds.
So that was actually one of the...
Now these hospitals, there were quite a few of them around Radar in Paris, there was another one down at Fleece-Wend.
Yet again, unfortunately, getting any information on these things is very, very difficult because the records were just about all destroyed at the end of the war.
There were no patient records to speak of or anything like that.
Very, very difficult to find any information at all.
Because a lot of them were private concerns as well.
The Duke of Bedford's wife set up a chain of hospitals for officers only of course.
Something like a million and a half soldiers went to these hospitals that were largely set up and run by the communities that did this kind of work.
Because of course there was no National Health Service then.
Now, yet again, in a part of Wales that has a long tradition of religious non-conformism and indeed Quakerism,
it's perhaps not unsurprising that at some stage people might say,
Well thank you very much for your kind information to go and stick a bayonet into somebody's guts, but no thank you.
And in mid-1916, Radnorshire and Andrindon gets its first case of conscientious objection.
Now, you are more than entitled in the Queen's Regulations and Articles of War to list as a reason for refusing to fight a conscientious objection.
That is enshrined in statute.
However, by about mid-16 we're getting increasingly desperate for men.
What used to happen is if you were declaring yourself as a CO, you had to go before a tribunal committee.
Now, that was normally set up to have two or three local worthies.
They'd normally get a local barrister or magistrate or solicitor, somebody whose profession was to twist words around.
And you can appreciate that some of these guys that came in front of the tribunals were simple farmhands straight out of the hills.
They used to ask them the question, What would you do if you came home and found a German ramishing your wife or mother?
Now, that is an intense moral dilemma.
And as one farmhand from Brecon answered, Well I'd shoot him of course.
If he didn't touch.
Now, in large number of cases, there were very poor treatment of COs.
There were those who would not fight in teeth arms but would do, for example, structure bearer work.
There were those who would not wear the uniform.
Now, the Quakers had something called the Friends Ambulance Service.
And you could go and serve in that.
It was kind of an ambulance organization that worked alongside the military ambulance organizations.
There were some, however, called Absolutists who had nothing to do with the war effort at all.
A lot of them were sent to hard labour camps.
Some of them even refused to do that.
They were actually then imprisoned.
A lot of them were actually sentenced to death.
The sentences were never actually carried out because Lloyd George refused to let that happen.
And in the end they were just given long prison sentences and after the war they were quietly released.
Landrindad's first CO was Mr. Bernard Bentley of the Springs Hotel, Landridge and Wells,
who, when called forward, said that the war was contrary to the teachings of Christ
and he was going to have nothing to do with it.
The board president from Landrindad was Tom Norton.
He got about, didn't he, Tom Norton?
Now, every indication suggests that Mr. Bentley was actually treated quite reasonably.
There was no sort of weasel words of trying to trick him of that.
He actually had tried to join the Friends Ambulance Service, but they'd been full at that time.
So he was actually held over and given a sort of discharge for six months
and said, come back and we'll see how you're getting on.
Eventually I think he would have got into that organization.
There were others in Landrindad as well.
By about 17 and 18 we were getting so desperate for manpower for the front
that they actually were trying to take away people from the town
who were giving the treatments out to the soldiers.
They were taking people who were 38 and 40 with a wife and two kids.
They were quite sensible normally in a farming community, something like Randershire.
If you were on a farm and you had two sons, they would generally just take the one
because of course you needed the other one to work the land.
In a lot of cases in Randershire they actually backfilled these farming places
with German and Italian prisoners as well.
A lot of blonde haired people up the Eiffel Valley.
Say no more.
No.
It was possible during this time to fill the Grand Pavilion
with 2,000 soldiers to have a boxing match or a poetry in it or some kind of festivity.
As I said, the soldiers were actually really, really, really well loved by the population.
I'm going to show you some incredibly bad poetry here now. Please bear with me.
Somebody locally fancying themselves as a bit of a poet wrote,
We heard of them often, expected them long, now at last they're with us, quite 4,000 strong.
From eight in the morning till past nine at night, it's nothing but soldiers that passes our sight.
Each day they march by in a fine lot they are too, who have answered the call as we hope others do.
Our church is on Sundays and crowds they attend, so we make them right welcome as we would our best friend.
Hurrah for our soldiers and for the RAMC, for as long as we have such, we'll keep Britain free.
Stirring stuff.
Now, a local doctor serving the RAMC, Lieutenant Seward, who was present at this poetry reading in the Pavilion,
was moved to reply in similar vein.
Now, has anyone ever spent a wet Sunday afternoon in Landryndod, will appreciate what he wrote.
Landryndod is the place for me, Landryndod is the place for a spree, it is so horribly lively.
As walking round the lake, I have often said to myself, cheer up Seward, you'll soon be dead.
So there we are ladies and gentlemen, the Royal Army Medical Corps, as I said, it must, you look at the pictures from the time,
they were a massive part of this town and yet again, 95 years later, absolutely, just about no trace that these guys ever came through this town at all.
So again, maybe we should actually take a plaque or a road or some flower bed or something.
Right, that is end of part one, because I can see one or two long blinks starting to happen.
All right, so we're going to have a sort of 15 minute recess, a stand easy recess in the military.
So if you'd like to go out yourself and they're waiting there to take your orders for their lovely coffee,
which you can bring back in or sit outside and have a smoke whatever you want to do, we'll reconvene in about 15 minutes, okay?